 ଲେଖା ଚାଲିଛି...

ଓଡ଼ିଶା ଏଫସି ବା ଓଡ଼ିଶା ଫୁଟବଲ କ୍ଲବ, ହେଉଛି ଏକ ଭାରତୀୟ ପେଶାଗତ ଫୁଟବଲ କ୍ଲବ ଯାହା ଭୁବନେଶ୍ୱର, ଓଡ଼ିଶାରେ ଅବସ୍ଥାପିତ । ଏହା ଅଲ ଇଣ୍ଡିଆ ଫୁଟବଲ ଫେଡେରେସନ ରୁ ଲାଇସେନ୍ସ ପାଇ ଇଣ୍ଡିଆନ ସୁପର ଲିଗରେ ପ୍ରତିଦ୍ୱନ୍ଦିତା କରିଥାଏ । ଏହି କ୍ଲବ ଅକ୍ଟୋବର ମାସ ୨୦୧୪ ମସିହାରେ ଦିଲ୍ଲୀ ଡାଇନାମୋଜ ଏଫସି ନାମରେ ଆରମ୍ଭ ହୋଇଥିଲା । ଯୁକ୍ତରାଷ୍ଟ୍ର ଆମେରିକାରେ ସ୍ଥିତ ଜାହାଜ ପୁନଃବ୍ୟବହାର କମ୍ପାନୀ ଜିଏମଏସ ଏହି ଦଳର ମାଲିକ । ୩୧ ଅଗଷ୍ଟ ୨୦୧୯ ମସିହାରେ ଏହି କ୍ଲବଟିର ନାମ ପରିବର୍ତ୍ତନ କରାଯାଇ ଓଡ଼ିଶା ଏଫସି ରଖାଯାଇଥିଲା । ଏହାର ମୂଳ ଅବସ୍ଥାନକୁ ଦିଲ୍ଲୀ ରୁ ଭୁବନେଶ୍ୱର କୁ ସ୍ଥାନାନ୍ତରଣ କରାଯାଇଥିଲା ।

୨୦୧୪ ମସିହା ପ୍ରାରମ୍ଭରେ ଅଲ ଇଣ୍ଡିଆ ଫୁଟବଲ ଫେଡେରେସନ, ଭାରତର ଜାତୀୟ ଫୁଟବଲ ଫେଡେରେସନ ଏବଂ ଆଇଏମଜି-ରିଲାଏନ୍ସ ଆଇପିଏଲ ଢାଞ୍ଚାରେ ଫୁଟବଲ ଉପରେ ଇଣ୍ଡିଆନ ସୁପର ଲିଗ ପାଇଁ ୮ କିମ୍ବା ୯ଟି ସହରରେ ଦଳ ଗଠନ ପାଇଁ ନିଲାମୀ ଘୋଷଣା କରିଥିଲେ । ୧୩ ଅପ୍ରେଲ ୨୦୧୪ରେ ଡିଇଏନ ନେଟୱାର୍କ ନାମକ ଏକ କମ୍ପାନୀ ଦିଲ୍ଲୀ ଦଳର ନିଲାମୀ ଜିତିଛନ୍ତି ବୋଲି ଘୋଷିତ ହୋଇଥିଲା । ଦଳଟି ଡଚ କ୍ଲବ ଫେଏନୁଡ ସହିତ ଏକ ସନ୍ଧି କରିଥିଲା, ଯାହା ମାତ୍ର ଏକ ବର୍ଷ ପାଇଁ ଚାଲିଥିଲା । 

ଏହି ଦଳଟି ତାଙ୍କର ପ୍ରତିଯୋଗିତା ୧୪ ଅକ୍ଟୋବର ୨୦୧୪ ମସିହାରେ ପୁନେ ଏଫସି ସହିତ ୦-୦ରେ ମ୍ୟାଚ ଡ୍ର କରି ଜବାହାରଲାଲ ନେହେରୁ ଷ୍ଟାଡିୟମ, ନୂଆଦିଲ୍ଲୀରେ ଶୁଭାରମ୍ଭ କରିଥିଲେ । The Dynamos did not experience the best of starts to their ISL campaign as they lagged behind at the last place till the 9th Round. The team rejuvenated and regrouped to climb out of the situation to finish in 5th place with a five match unbeaten run which included three wins and two draws. Delhi narrowly missed out on qualification for the semi-finals falling short only by a point. In 2015 Delhi Dynamos qualified for the first time for the semi-finals of the Indian Super League with the fewest games played in 2015. In 2016 season, the club finished third in the league round with 21 points and lost to the Kerala Blasters FC in the semi-finals of the season. In 2017 season, the club finished eighth in the league round with 19 points and couldn't qualify for semi-finals of the season. In 2018 season, the club again finished eighth in the league round with 18 points and couldn't qualify for the semi-finals of the season.

On 31 August 2019, Delhi Soccer Private Limited signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Government of Odisha, to shift the home base from the national capital New Delhi to Bhubaneswar, Odisha and re-branded the franchise as Odisha FC. The new home for the team was decided to be the Kalinga Stadium at Bhubaneswar. As per the MoU, it was mutually decided that the club’s first team, youth teams, youth football development program and grassroots football development program will be based in Odisha.

Brought in March 2016 as club's new majority co-owner, GMS is world's largest cash buyer of ships and offshore assets for recycling. GMS currently holds 100% of the ownership in club which it purchased in three installments of 55%, 25% and 20% from DEN Networks

The 60,000 capacity Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium in New Delhi was the home ground of the club when it's frachise name was Delhi Dynamos FC. The club under the brand franchise name Delhi Dynamos FC, played first five seasons of Indian Super League, from 2014 season to 2018–19 at the JLN Stadium. 

On 31 August 2019, through a Memorandum of Understanding with the Department of Sports and Youth Services of the Goverment of Odisha, it was mutually decided to re-brand the franchise as Odisha FC with its base being the 15,000 capacity Kalinga Stadium in Bhubaneswar, Odisha.

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

ଛାଞ୍ଚ:Fs mid
